By staying in the Crizzau house we've placed some distance between the house renovation project and us.
It meant we could treat the stay as more of a holiday.
The downside was that any site visits to the house meant a 20 mile round trip,
but at least we could separate ourselves from the slow progress on the renovation.
The benefits included experiencing life in a Greek house in a village and living in a new place.
Our stay in the house as the first residence since the rebuild led to a misunderstanding.
This took place on the second afternoon of our stay.
We were locking the front door to take a stroll up into the village for a coffee or a cold drink
when we were hailed from the garden next door.
An elderly smiling man was calling to us from his chair at a table on a shady terrace behind the house next door.
We replied good afternoon in our best Greek,
but he indicated that we should come into his garden and sit down.
It seemed only polite to comply and to explain we were going out in our Greek might make conversation tricky
and it was a more difficult option.
We all sat down and all smiled at each other.
Names were exchanged, he was called Michaelis,
and he pushed some of the walnuts he was cracking open towards us.
Smiling, he showed us that the nuts were ripe enough to be cracked open using bare hands.
The brief conversation was punctuated by a chorus of barking from a small dog
tethered to a kennel in a separate fenced off part of the shady garden.
We were asked if we liked the nuts and replied in broken Greek with a question whether they were from the garden.
This was met with laughter, no no from Catharow.
This was a plateau higher up in the mountains that we knew was heavily cultivated with products beyond the ubiquitous olive trees.
The walnuts, or as we now learnt, cremithia, were delicious.
Unfortunately their dryness started me coughing.
Eleni called Michaelis with a surprisingly loud voice.
We heard some noise from behind a curtain over the door
and a very small lady wearing an apron, her silver hair pinned up in a bun, appeared from inside the house.
She was introduced as Eleni, his wife, and was quickly instructed to bring us drinks.
Raki, the great brandy for me, with fresh orange juice provided for the ladies.
When I questioned whether Michaelis was drinking Raki, he indicated a heart condition with cardiac, the Greek for heart, giving us cardiac in English.
We sat there, the three of us smiling at one another, with the diminutive Eleni at a similar height, although she was still standing up.
I offered her my seat, but Michaelis quickly directed her into the house.
Minutes later she appeared with a plate of peeled and sliced apple.
This was followed by a plate of peeled pear.
At last Eleni produced a tiny child-sized chair from behind the curtain and sat down.
It was time for a conversation that we would have to get used to in Crete.
One of the first questions a Greek asked you is, how old are you?
Usually quickly followed by their age and questions and statements about children and grandchildren.
After we owned up about our ages, we were informed that Michaelis was 82 and Eleni was 92.
We were dealing with the oldest waitress and her toy boy that we'd encountered so far on the island.
The combined effect of the unaccustomed heat admittedly tempered by the shade of the garden,
the moonracky and the stress of Greek conversation meant that we would need to make our excuses and leave.
We achieved this only after accepting a large bag of warm nuts and pears.
Putting those inside the front door, we continued our stroll into town,
but this would not be our last conversation in the neighbour's garden.
The Hill Village was a tourist destination during the day,
with both cars and coaches bringing visitors to the long winding High Street,
with its collection of cafes, taverns and craft shops.
Lace, leather, pottery and glassware, as well as carved olive wood,
filled the shops and spilled onto tables on the narrow pavement.
In previous visits we'd call there for a drink or a meal,
sometimes en route to the higher Cathro Plateau, now known to us as the source of Michaelis's Walnuts.
In the centre of the village was a small square,
where there were a number of bars and taverns which shared the space and placed their tables and chairs.
We stopped for a nice coffee and reflected on the generous hospitality we'd received from our new neighbours.
We also speculated whether we would always be ambushed when leaving the house.
I couldn't be spending every outing in a rakie as pleasant as it was.
Although the days were often spent visiting the house project and driving out of the village on sorties to our favourite island spots,
most evenings found us back in the village.
We mixed our time between using the kitchen at home to rustle up some Cretan cuisine and eating suppers out in the village.
In any event, most evenings when we were there we walked round the village for a stroll.
The place took on a different character at night.
Most of the tourist craft shops are shut, but the local food stores, bakers, butchers, hairdressers, ironmongers,
as well as the cafes and taverns reopened for evening business, sometimes until a surprisingly late hour.
This made the large village quite a buzzing place at night.
As we became more recognised through the frequency of our strolls,
it was apparent that we had not just driven to the village for a well-off supper.
Quite often we were politely asked where we were staying, not an unreasonable request,
as we had only spotted a couple of small buildings with rooms to rent signs.
The village, some 20 minute drive from the coast, was more of a day-trip destination.
In the evenings we recognised the same people sitting outside their houses,
and the council of Cullinithcys developed into longer conversations.
By the end of the week we were chatting about our plans for our house, their children,
culinary recommendations, the changes on the island.
It was a very pleasant experience and something we looked forward to.
There was the attendant benefit of being donated fruit and vegetables.
You must try our apricots from the garden, they are very good this season.
We started to feel guilty not having anything to offer in return,
but we were assured by Manos when we discussed this dilemma with him
that most families had some connection with tourism
and just saw a collective benefit in our stay.
One morning there was a knock on the front door.
Stephanie opened it and for a split second thought that no one was there,
until looking down she saw all four foot six of Eleni looking up at her, smiling,
and holding a plate full of warm cheese pies as a gift.
This was so kind and they were delicious, melting the mouth pastry covering warm feta cheese,
contrasting with a coating of sweet local honey.
We called round later that day to take the neighbours some flowers as a thank you for the gift
and their early hospitality to us.
There was some stilted conversation by us due to our limited Greek,
but it appeared that we should stay as Michalis wanted us to meet someone.
A few minutes later a smiling young lady carrying a gift wrap box came into the garden.
The mystery was soon cleared up.
This was their granddaughter and much to our relief spoke fluent English.
She worked as a secondary school teacher in the next town.
Katarina had been phoned to be told about her grandparents' new neighbours
and had been asked to come and translate the conversation.
Drinks and plates were brought and a box of cakes was opened.
My grandparents are very pleased to have you as their new neighbours
and hope you will be happy in your new house.
We thanked her, but explained we were only borrowing the house for stays
while our house renovation in another village was being arranged
and the house belonged to the architect.
This comment was met with confused looks and an exchange in Greek between our hosts and Katarina.
They are sorry, they thought you had bought the house.
My grandfather wants to know which village you prefer.
I replied that we both liked his village very much.
Then he asked why have you bought a house in another village then?
This was not going to be easy.
The cost schedule and a shock
After some wait it arrived, the email with the promised schedule of costs and it was a shock.
We discussed different components and had in the early stages been given some rough costings for the essential works.
The final figure was a consolidated total, which could be described as a total turnkey cost
with the schedule to include final cleaning, site clearance, painting and decorating
and making some bespoke furniture that we had discussed, but it was too much.
It felt like one of the low points of the project.
During the last visit to the island we completed detailed plans
and even included where two-way light switches would be.
The details were an opportunity to properly consider how the necessary storage could be incorporated into the small areas we were working with.
Some of these plans were very creative and exciting
and were a continuation of the periodic debate about our niches.
The incorporation of glass panels and built-in storage was certainly a great way of making the most of the small dark rooms,
but the reality of the cost of this bespoke design was a sobering wake-up call.
For a few days we did nothing. We were shocked. It was much more than we were expecting.
When we did talk about it we considered some extreme options,
which included valuing the house for the building permit and putting it up for sale.
Another less radical option would be to put the renovation on hold and moving on a camping basis,
using water from the village tap, solar battery lights or a generator and awaiting the arrival of mains drainage.
An option already rumoured to be employed by an American owner living around the corner.
Then we considered abandoning the architect and looking for another builder to quote,
although I have this was practical from a distance of almost 2,000 miles.
Thinking how we got to this point, we recalled so many discussions and options that have been thought of,
refined or developed or ultimately discarded.
Surely it wouldn't end with us selling it before we'd ever stayed there.
At the first meeting with Manos we'd considered the roof terrace and the small balcony,
the lack of a view and difficulties in creating openings in order to achieve this
and later when planning consents were being arranged there were awkward dialogues with the planners
when there was a need to convince them we weren't trying to create a third story
but only a small terrace to allow us to see the view.
At that point we considered abandoning the terrace idea and constructing some bizarre viewing platform
in the corner of the first floor room and making a virtue out of this by placing much needed storage underneath.
At this point I decided to contact someone we'd met in one of the other villages
whose house had already been renovated by Manos.
This provided some welcome reassurances as their experience had been very similar.
It was reassured that this all in price was certainly negotiable
and had in all probability been partially caused by our interest in design additions.
When we similarly asked where costs could be reduced they'd been told, everywhere.
So the discussions began.
It was right, the question was met with the same answer, of course everywhere.
Certainly any activity we would have carried out ourselves at home was to be excluded
so internal decorating was out.
There were also the more adventurous elements which when suggested and the costs had been questioned
were normally met with, no it would not be expensive.
When all of these were added together expense did seem an issue.
The glass spiral staircase up to the terrace was questioned.
Yes, they would in fact be more expensive than the more normal metal staircase.
Right, we'll be having metal then.
At the end of some of these discussions we took stock with Manos.
The house would still be interesting with these changes, of course.
And we would still use some glass to get light down through the house.
Yes, that would still be done.
Okay then.
It was agreed that Manos would completely review the cost schedule
with a view to removing optional costs
as well as any costs or activities we could do ourselves such as decorating.
We had an anxious couple of weeks awaiting the new quotation
wondering whether we would have to reconsider Mothball or even completely abandon the project.
It was a real low point in the whole enterprise
and to make things worse that summer was a particularly miserable one in Sussex.
Cold and wet.
The idea of a completed holiday home in the sun seemed particularly appealing
but it seemed a distant prospect.
A revised cost schedule arrived late that summer
but certainly made a reduction to the total
and several weeks of revisions followed back and forth between Crete and Sussex.
It was agreed that the final draft would be signed
when we returned for our autumn holiday in a few weeks' time.
Works to start.
The October trip had seen us staying in the renovated house in the hills again.
The main activity on this visit was the finalising of the works and project management contract.
Email drafts had been exchanged back and forth between Crete and Sussex the previous month
and we really hoped to finalise details of the costs and sign the contract.
The island was warm as usual for this time of year.
The progress to this point had seemed slow with a delay on planning consents
followed by long discussions and emails about how the house should be designed.
The lack of space limited some options but also meant that more care was necessary
with the limitations placed on it by this.
Manus' office was again inspirational with shelves full of architectural books
and glass tables laden with glossy magazines.
One evening we were introduced to the idea of using a small mini digger
to dig out the septic tank under the house
and we were given an explanation of how access could be created
by removing half of the front wall.
In short order we were introduced to the plant operator who called into the office.
He unsuccessfully tried to reassure us by showing a photo of his mini digger on his phone
while giving us focal impressions of it.
I must admit we were far from reassured.
Staying in the renovated house had a number of advantages for us.
It allowed us to more carefully consider our real requirements for storage
as well as day to day living in a warm climate.
The house had a number of features that we enjoyed
and hoped could be incorporated into the design of our own house.
There was a coolness in the downstairs room
held by small windows, shutters and the ability to get a through draft,
taking the warm air up the stairs and out onto the terrace.
The terrace itself provided both shade and sun
and proved to be the place for breakfast under the shade and supper at sunset.
Colour in the house was generally limited to highlights
so the background colour had been lighter and cooler.
Lighting was flexible with feature lighting and useful dimmers.
High level storage made most of the space.
Sympathetic mixes of contrasting materials provided interest.
Glass, thick ply cut across the layers, exposed stone, limed wood and painted concrete,
recycled old wood with faded paint, aged olive wood beams.
These requirements were discussed at length, both by ourselves and later with Manos in his office
and more leisurely under the stairs over supper on one of the terraces of one of the restaurants.
Some decisions were made during these talks.
The ground floor would have a stone floor as lightly coloured as possible
and soft irregular shaped tiles.
There wouldn't be a chimney or a wood stove.
The space it would need could not be sacrificed.
Seating areas were needed on all floors and should be combined with storage.
Some of this could be fixed.
An emergency water tank was advised for when the main supply was interrupted.
This could be placed in the floor and linked to a pump.
Some supply of water would be useful to the roof terrace, a small sink perhaps.
Some screening on the terrace for shading and privacy was needed.
Various ways of bringing light into the ground floor was talked about again.
Some glass panels in the floor was a possibility, bringing natural light down through the building.
A small safe should be provided with enough space for storing a laptop computer.
Some of the old wood that had been saved from the house could be recycled and used as features.
The signing of the works contract itself was toasted in the office with glasses of champagne.
The talking, planning and thinking phase was at last at an end,
or at least we hoped it was.
The celebrations were indeed premature, as could be seen from a few sample emails from Crete that were sent to us that winter.
November. Greetings to you both.
It's still raining here.
We need a two week period without any rain at all,
and it needs to be completely dry before we start demolishing so that we do not have problems.
We will inform you when we can start.
Best wishes, Mannals.
December past, and Christmas came and went in England and Crete.
We seemed to have drifted into another period of inactivity on the project.
We had agreed everything, signed the contracts and be told that builders and specialists were ready and willing to start, eager even.
It seemed ironic that wet weather in Crete was delaying things. England was sunny and cold.
We awaited news.
17th January.
Many greetings to you and I hope you are both well.
I am pleased to inform you we are finally starting works on Wednesday next week.
I will keep you informed.
Best wishes to you from a warm and sunny Crete.
Kandrigarj, Mannals.
Many greetings.
Thanks for the funds transfer.
The electrician started with the electric connection to the mains.
As soon as we sign the connection contracts and have also electricity, the water is connected, we will start.
Finally, an email arrived on sunny February morning in Sussex.
We have finally started.
This is the depth achieved after 30 hours of digging.
The initial debris and stone has already been transported away and this is what we are doing every two days.
It is extremely hard.
I am attaching seven photos and keep you updated.
Best regards, Mannals.
Arfer i'r e-mail erbyn ddwy ffotau.
Roeddwn ni wedi dweud yn ein cyfleoedd,
nifer o ffotau o'r bwyd a'u bwyd yn cael eu hwyl yn y gron,
yn cael eu cymorth,
yn y ffordd o'r ddwy ffyrdd o archeoleg,
a nid oes yn ein haws yn ôl.
Roedd y ffotau yn gweld y pwynt y byddwn i'r ddwy ffyrdd o'r haws yn cael eu hwyl yn y ffyrdd o'r ddwy ffyrdd.
Y ffotau cyntaf oedd y ddwy ffyrdd jcb style Degar,
a'i ddwy ffyrdd yn y ffordd ar y haws.
Roedd yn ymddygiad y ffyrdd narydd.
Yn y ffordd y byddwn yn cael ymddygiad o'r cyffanion Maria.
Roeddwn yn gobeithio bod y tŷfn a'r ddwy ffyrdd
yn gallu bod yn ymwneud â rhai o bwydau nesaf o'r ddwy ffyrdd yng Nghymru.
Y ffotau ddwy ffyrdd yma oedd y llwyf yn y ffordd o'r haws.
Y ffyrdd yn ystod gyda'i camau i'r ffyrdd,
yn ymwneud â'i baro'n y ffyrdd.
Mae'r ddwy ffyrdd yn y ffordd o'r haws
yn ymwneud â'r cyffanion o'r mwyaf a'r bwydau o'r roedd.
Roeddwn yn gallu gweld y ddwy ffyrdd yma
gyda'r hysbysau hydrolig llwyf
yn ymwneud â'r gwaith a'i ddysgu yn y ffordd o'r haws.
Ar y ffordd o'r haws,
a'r ffaith yn ymwneud â'r ystod y ffordd,
roedd ymglwm ddwy ffyrdd o'r ddwy ffyrdd.
Y ffotau ddwy ffyrdd yma oedd yn fwy o'r ffyrdd,
roedd y ffyrdd yn fwy o'r ffyrdd.
Roeddwn yn e-mail yn ôl.
Diolch.
Mae'n rhan o ddwy ffrindiau wedi bod yn fwy o ffrindiau
am rhan a chyffredin.
Rydyn ni'n cael ei ddweud yn fwy o ffrindiau.
Diolch yn fwy.
Helo.
Yn ymwneud â'ch gwella,
roedd y ddwy ffyrdd yn ymwneud â'r ffyrdd
yn ymwneud â'r ffyrdd,
a'n ymwneud â'r ffyrdd.
Rydw i'n gwella ffotau ffyrdd,
un o'r ffyrdd yma yma.
Ychwanegwch eich ddwy ffrindiau.
Mae'n rhan o ddwy ffrindiau.
17 Febrer.
Diolch.
Mae'n snŵr.
Fe wnaethon ni ddwy ffrindiau ymlaen.
Mae'r pwytydd yn cael ei ddwy ffrindiau
yn ymwneud â'r ffyrdd.
Rydw i wedi ceisio ddysgu'r ddwy ffrindiau
yn fyw,
ac hefyd y ddwy ffrindiau yn ymwneud â'r rhan
yn y ffrindiau.
Os y ffrindiau fwyaf oedd yn ymwneud
yma fel y gallwn ni'n planu,
i gynnwys gos,
mae'r gwella gwella gwella
ddim oedd yn cael ei ddwy ffrindiau.
Rydyn ni wedi'i hwstio'r ddwy ffrindiau
ar gyfer amser,
chweithio'r ddwy ffrindiau yn hollol
i ddwy ffrindiau,
ac yn gwneud yn ddwy ffrindiau,
ond mae'r ddwy ffrindiau yn fy nghyfn,
felly mae'n yn gwneud y ffrindiau'n ddwy ffrindiau
Rydw i'n gwella'r gwella gwella
a chweithio'r ddwy ffrindiau.
Mae'n dod i'r gwella'n gwella'n gwella.
Yn y cyfnod, rhai pethau o'n byw
yn gwella o'r gwella a phynhwystiaeth
o'r gwella,
oherwydd bod y gwella'n ymwneud
ar unrhyw ddwy ffrindiau roch
yn dda, oherwydd yr hyn rydym wedi'i gwella.
Mae'r ffrindiau wedi'i gwella.
Rydw i'n gwella 8 ficturau
yn cael ar 14 Febreriau
a 6 ficturau yma.
Rydw i'n fwyaf i'n ddweud i mi
bod yw'r holl bwysau wedi'i gwella
yn y 26 o Marll.
Felly, roedd yn dda i'n gwella.
Rydw i'n gwella.
Ar ôl ymddechrau cymdeithasol
a chydrwch y gwella,
roeddwn yn gallu gwybod beth oedd yn ymwneud
am y gwaith o'r gwaith yma
ac i ddweud yn fwyaf am y cwmaint cymdeithasol
yn y gwella yma am rhai fwyaf sy'n gwella
oherwydd bod y gwella yn dda
a'r gwaith yn ymwneud am y cwmaint cymdeithasol
yn y gwaith yma.
Mae'r cyhoedd yn dda.
Mae'r e-mails nesaf yn dweud
bod y gwaith yn ymwneud
ar 26 o Marll.
Mae'n dda i'w gwybod
yn dda i ddwy o ffyrdd yn dda
ond, ymwneud,
un e-mail yn dda i ddweud
ymwneud y 29 o Marll
gyda'r gwella o 14 ffotau.
Mae'n dda i'w gwella
am ymwneud ymwneud
ar y pwtydd
ac ar y bwysau'r ddaen
yn gyfrifiadau bwrdd diwylliannol
a chyfnod 2 mwyaf o pwmpennwyr diwylliannol
a gwasanaethau.
Mae'n dda i ddweud
ymwneud y 14 ffotau.
ymwneud y ffotau diwylliannol
arweinyddol.
Mae'n dda i gwybod fwy o ffotau,
Mae'r ffotau wedi'i ddangos,
ond nid yw'r holl fath o ddau.
Mae'n dda i gwybod y ffotau o'r stridd nesaf
ar y bwyd,
un o'r ffotau yma yn ymwneud
yn ymwneud yn ymwneud yn y ffotau
mechnaidd, ond yn ymwneud
y ffotau o'r caffoneon Maria,
pan ymwneud Maria eich hun.
Roedd yn ymwneud yn ymwneud
ar y bwyd,
er mwynhau'n dda,
ac roedd yn ymwneud yn y bwyd,
oherwydd, efallai,
yn ymwneud yn ymwneud
ar y ffotau yma,
oherwydd,
am ddau o bryd,
mae'n dda i ni ddod i'r ffotau
a'i ddod i ni ddod i'r ffotau
i fod yn cyfrannu â siaradau bwyd
cymaint o ffotau o ffotau
o'r cyfrannu,
a'i ddod i ni ddod i ffotau
a'i ddod i ni ymwneud
yn y ffotau,
ac rydym ni'n dda i'r cyfrannu.
Roedd yn dda i ni ddod i'r ffotau
a'i ddod i'r cyfrannu.
Mae'n dda i ni ddod i'r cyfrannu.
Wel, mae'n am y 1 km o ddod i'r ffotau
o'r ffotau yma o'r ffotau yma
ar y llwyf hwyl,
felly rydym ni wedi bod yn cyfrannu o'r ystod
o'i ddod i ni ddod i'r ffotau.
Yn y cyfrannu hwn, mae'r mwyaf o'r ddynau
yn dda i ni ddod i'r ffotau
yn ymwneud yn y ffotau
a'i ddod i ni ddod i'r ffotau
yn y ffotau o'r ffotau.
Gwnaethon ni fod yn cael newydd newydd
o'r ffotau.